routing recipe (#285)
SAFE-Stack/docs: docs/recipes/ui/add-routing.md

Reviewer: Just a reminder that there are some unresolved comments from the last review.

﻿# How do I add routes to a SAFE app?

When building larger apps, you probably want different pages to be accessible through different URLs. In this recipe, we show you how to add routes to different pages to an application, including adding a "page not found" page that is displayed when an unknown URL is entered.

## 1. Adding the Feliz router

Install Feliz.Router in the client project

```bash
dotnet paket add Feliz.Router -p Client
```

To include the router in the Client, add `open Feliz.Router` at the top of Index.fs

## 2. Adding the URL object

Add the current page to the model of the client, using a new `Page` type

```fsharp
type Page =
    | TodoList
    | NotFound

type Model =
    { CurrentPage: Page
      Todos: Todo list
      Input: string }
```

## 3.  Parsing URLs

> Create a function to parse an url to a page, including a wildcard for unmapped pages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a function to parse a URL to a page, including a wildcard for unmapped pages
```

Assuming you're pronouncing URL "you are ell", "an" is more appropriate than "a".

```fsharp
let parseUrl url = 
    match url with
    | ["todo"] -> Page.TodoList
    | _ -> Page.NotFound
```

> ## 4. Initialization when using an URL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 4. Initialization when using a URL
```

On initialization, set the current page

```fsharp
let init () : Model * Cmd<Msg> =
    let page = Router.currentPath () |> parseUrl

    let model =
        { CurrentPage = page
          Todos = []
          Input = "" }
    ...
    model, cmd
```

## 5. Updating the URL

Add an action to handle navigation.

> To the `Msg` type, add a `PageChanged` case of  `Page`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To the `Msg` type, add a `PageChanged` case of `Page`
```

```fsharp
type Msg =
    ...
    | PageChanged of Page
```

Add the `PageChanged` update action

```fsharp
let update (msg: Msg) (model: Model) : Model * Cmd<Msg> =
    match msg with
    ...
    | PageChanged page -> { model with CurrentPage = page }, Cmd.none
```

## 6. Displaying the correct content

> Rename the  `view` to `TodoView`; add a new view function that returns the current page

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rename the  `view` to `todoView`; add a new view function that returns the current page
```

> Rename the  `view` to `TodoView`; add a new view function that returns the current page

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rename the  `view` to `todoView`; add a new view function that returns the current page
```

```fsharp
let view (model: Model) (dispatch: Msg -> unit) =
    match model.CurrentPage with
    | TodoList -> todoView model dispatch
    | NotFound -> Bulma.box "Page not found"
    
```

> ### Adding UI elements to every page of the website
> In this recipe, we moved all the page content to the `todoView`, but you don't have to. You can add UI you want to display on every page of the application to the `view` function.

## 7. Adding the React router to the view

> Add the `React.Router` element as the outermost element of the view. Dispatch the PageChanged event on `onUrlChange`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the `React.Router` element as the outermost element of the view. Dispatch the PageChanged event on `onUrlChanged`
```

```fsharp
let view (model: Model) (dispatch: Msg -> unit) =
    React.router [
        router.onUrlChanged (parseUrl >> PageChanged >> dispatch)
        router.children [
            match model.CurrentPage with
            ...
        ]
    ]
```

## 9.  Try it out 

The routing should work now. Try navigating to [localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080/); you should see a page with "Page not Found". If you go to [localhost:8080/todo](http://localhost:8080/todo), you should see the todo app.

## 10. Adding more pages

> Now that you have set up the routing, adding more pages is simple; add a new case to the `Page` type; add a route for this page in the `ParseUrl` function; add a function that takes a model and dispatcher to generate your new page, and add a new case to the pattern match inside the view to display the new case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have set up the routing, adding more pages is simple: add a new case to the `Page` type; add a route for this page in the `ParseUrl` function; add a function that takes a model and dispatcher to generate your new page, and add a new case to the pattern match inside the view to display the new case.
```

> ﻿# How do I add routes to a SAFE app without splitting the app into multiple models?

Reviewer: "splitting the app into multiple models" seems a bit imprecise to me.

```suggestion
﻿# How do I add routing to a SAFE app with a shared model for all pages?
```

*Written for SAFE template version 4.2.0*

When building larger apps, you probably want different pages to be accessible through different URLs. In this recipe, we show you how to add routes to different pages to an application, including adding a "page not found" page that is displayed when an unknown URL is entered.

## 1. Adding the Feliz router

Install Feliz.Router in the client project

```bash
dotnet paket add Feliz.Router -p Client -V 3.8
```

> !!! Warning "Feliz.Router versions"

Reviewer: Didn't know you could do this, it's cool! How did you find out about it?

Author: It's in the docs for Admonition https://python-markdown.github.io/extensions/admonition/

    To see the installed version of the SAFE template, run in the command line:
    
    ```bash
    dotnet new --list
    ```

To include the router in the Client, add `open Feliz.Router` at the top of Index.fs

## 2. Adding the URL object

Add the current page to the model of the client, using a new `Page` type

=== "Code"
    ```fsharp
    type Page =
        | TodoList
        | NotFound
    
    type Model =
        { CurrentPage: Page
          Todos: Todo list
          Input: string }
    ```
=== "Diff"
    ```.diff
    + type Page =
    +     | TodoList
    +     | NotFound
    +
    - type Model = { Todos: Todo list; Input: string }
    + type Model =
    +    { CurrentPage: Page
    +      Todos: Todo list
    +      Input: string }
    ```

## 3.  Parsing URLs

Create a function to parse a URL to a page, including a wildcard for unmapped pages

```fsharp
let parseUrl url = 
    match url with
    | ["todo"] -> Page.TodoList
    | _ -> Page.NotFound
```

## 4. Initialization when using a URL

On initialization, set the current page

=== "Code"
    ```fsharp 
    let init () : Model * Cmd<Msg> =

>         let page = Router.currentUrl () |> parseUrl

Reviewer: `Feliz.Router` needs to be opened before this line.

Author: It is mentioned in the beginning, but not with a code snippet. Made it more explicit

    
        let model =
            { CurrentPage = page
              Todos = []
              Input = "" }
        ...
        model, cmd
    ```
=== "Diff"
    ```diff
      let init () : Model * Cmd<Msg> =
    +     let page = Router.currentUrl () |> parseUrl
    +
    -      let model = { Todos = []; Input = "" }
    +      let model =
    +        { CurrentPage = page
    +         Todos = []
    +         Input = "" }
          ...
          model, cmd
    ```
## 5. Updating the URL

Add an action to handle navigation.

To the `Msg` type, add a `PageChanged` case of `Page`

=== "Code"
    ```fsharp
    type Msg =
        ...
        | PageChanged of Page
    ```

> === "diff"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== "Diff"
```

let view (model: Model) (dispatch: Msg -> unit) =
    match model.CurrentPage with
    | TodoList -> todoView model dispatch
    | NotFound -> Bulma.box "Page not found"
    
```

!!! info "Adding UI elements to every page of the website"
    In this recipe, we moved all the page content to the `todoView`, but you don't have to. You can add UI you want to display on every page of the application to the `view` function.

## 7. Adding the React router to the view

Add the `React.Router` element as the outermost element of the view. Dispatch the PageChanged event on `onUrlChanged`

=== "Code"
    ```fsharp
    let view (model: Model) (dispatch: Msg -> unit) =
        React.router [
            router.onUrlChanged (parseUrl >> PageChanged >> dispatch)
            router.children [
                match model.CurrentPage with
                ...
            ]
        ]
    ```
=== "Diff"
    ```.diff
      let view (model: Model) (dispatch: Msg -> unit) =
    +     React.router [
    +         router.onUrlChanged (parseUrl >> PageChanged >> dispatch)
              router.children [
                  match model.CurrentPage with
                  ...
              ]
          ]
    ```

> ## 9.  Try it out 

Reviewer: The suggestions for the title/heading have got me thinking - part of the benefit of this approach is that state is never lost. This means that you can navigate away from a route and then back and the state is still there. For example, you can enter some text in the todo text input, browse to localhost:8080, then back to localhost:8080/#/todo and the text will still be in the input. I think that it would be worth explicitly mentioning this in the try it out section.

I would also mention it in the introduction - it's a good reason why someone might choose this recipe over an alternative.

Author: Added that

The routing should work now. Try navigating to [localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080/); you should see a page with "Page not Found". If you go to [localhost:8080/#/todo](http://localhost:8080/#/todo), you should see the todo app.

!!! info "# sign"

>     You might be surprised to see the hash sign as part of the url. It enables React to react to url changes without a full page refresh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You might be surprised to see the hash sign as part of the URL. It enables React to react to URL changes without a full page refresh.
```

    There are ways to omit this, but getting this to work properly is outside of the scope of this recipe.

## 10. Adding more pages

> Now that you have set up the routing, adding more pages is simple: add a new case to the `Page` type; add a route for this page in the `ParseUrl` function; add a function that takes a model and dispatcher to generate your new page, and add a new case to the pattern match inside the view to display the new case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have set up the routing, adding more pages is simple: add a new case to the `Page` type; add a route for this page in the `parseUrl` function; add a function that takes a model and dispatcher to generate your new page, and add a new case to the pattern match inside the `view` function to display the new case.
```
